[MIXEDARCH-269] multi-arch compute add IBM Z KVM procedure (#63855)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/machine-user-infra-machines-ibm-z.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * post_installation_configuration/configuring-multi-arch-compute-machines/creating-multi-arch-compute-nodes-ibm-z.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="machine-user-infra-machines-ibm-z_{context}"]
= Creating {op-system} machines on {ibmzProductName} with z/VM

> You can create more {op-system-first} compute machines running on {ibmzProductName} with z/VM and attach them to your existing bare metal x86_64 cluster.

Reviewer: attach them to your existing bare metal x86_64 cluster. -> attach them to your existing cluster.

.Procedure

. Extract the Ignition config file from the cluster by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc extract -n openshift-machine-api secret/worker-user-data-managed --keys=userData --to=- > worker.ign
----

. Upload the `worker.ign` Ignition config file you exported from your cluster to your HTTP server. Note the URL of this file.

. You can validate that the Ignition file is available on the URLs. The following example gets the Ignition config file for the compute node:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ curl -k http://<HTTP_server>/worker.ign
----

. Download the {op-system-base} live kernel, initramfs, and rootfs files by running to following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
curl -LO $(oc -n openshift-machine-config-operator get configmap/coreos-bootimages -o jsonpath='{.data.stream}' \
| jq -r '.architectures.s390x.artifacts.metal.formats.pxe.kernel.location')
----
+
[source,terminal]
----
curl -LO $(oc -n openshift-machine-config-operator get configmap/coreos-bootimages -o jsonpath='{.data.stream}' \
| jq -r '.architectures.s390x.artifacts.metal.formats.pxe.initramfs.location')
----
+
[source,terminal]
----

> curl -LO $(oc -n openshift-machine-config-operator get configmap/coreos-bootimages -o jsonpath='{.data.stream}' \

Reviewer: should have a $ in front (if this is the consistent style of writing commands executed on a shell)

| jq -r '.architectures.s390x.artifacts.metal.formats.pxe.rootfs.location')
----

. Move the downloaded {op-system-base} live kernel, initramfs, and rootfs files to an HTTP or HTTPS server that is accessible from the z/VM guest you want to add.

> . Create a parameter file for the z/VM guest. The following parameters are specific for the virtual machine:

Author: For IBM z/VM users it's a common term. Also used in the RHEL docs: https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/installation_guide/chap-installation-planning-s390

** Optional: To specify a static IP address, add an `ip=` parameter with the following entries, separated by colons (“:”):
... The IP address for the machine.
... An empty string.
... The gateway.
... The netmask.
... The machine host and domain name in the form `hostname.domainname`. Omit this value to let {op-system} decide.
... The network interface name. Omit this value to let {op-system} decide.
... The value `none`.
** For `coreos.inst.ignition_url=`, specify the URL to the `worker.ign` file. Only HTTP and HTTPS protocols are supported.
** For `coreos.live.rootfs_url=`, specify the matching rootfs artifact for the kernel and initramfs you are booting. Only HTTP and HTTPS protocols are supported.

** For installations on DASD-type disks, complete the following tasks:
... For `coreos.inst.install_dev=`, specify `/dev/dasda`.
... Use `rd.dasd=` to specify the DASD where {op-system} is to be installed.
... Leave all other parameters unchanged.
+

> Example parameter file, `additional-worker-dasd`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example parameter file, `additional-worker-dasd.parm`:
```

> Example parameter file, `additional-worker-dasd.parm`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is an example parameter file, `additional-worker-dasd.parm`:
```

> Example parameter file, `additional-worker-dasd`, for the bootstrap machine:

Reviewer: Example parameter file, `additional-worker-dasd`, for the bootstrap machine:
-->
Example parameter file, `additional-worker-dasd.parm`:

+
[source,terminal]
----
rd.neednet=1 \
console=ttysclp0 \
coreos.inst.install_dev=/dev/dasda \
coreos.live.rootfs_url=http://cl1.provide.example.com:8080/assets/rhcos-live-rootfs.s390x.img \
coreos.inst.ignition_url=http://cl1.provide.example.com:8080/ignition/worker.ign \
ip=172.18.78.2::172.18.78.1:255.255.255.0:::none nameserver=172.18.78.1 \
rd.znet=qeth,0.0.bdf0,0.0.bdf1,0.0.bdf2,layer2=1,portno=0 \
zfcp.allow_lun_scan=0 \
rd.dasd=0.0.3490
----
+

> Write all options in the parameter file as a single line and make sure you have no newline characters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Write all options in the parameter file as a single line and make sure that there are no newline characters.
```

Author: Would like to keep the whole sentence in active voice.

** For installations on FCP-type disks, complete the following tasks:

> ... Use `rd.zfcp=<adapter>,<wwpn>,<lun>` to specify the FCP disk where {op-system} is to be installed. For multipathing repeat this step for each additional path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
... Use `rd.zfcp=<adapter>,<wwpn>,<lun>` to specify the FCP disk where {op-system} is to be installed. For multipathing, repeat this step for each additional path.
```

====
... Leave all other parameters unchanged.
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Additional post-installation steps are required to fully enable multipathing. For more information, see “Enabling multipathing with kernel arguments on {op-system}" in _Post-installation machine configuration tasks_.
====
// Add xref once it's allowed.
+
The following is an example parameter file `additional-worker-fcp.parm` for a worker node with multipathing:
+
[source,terminal]
----
rd.neednet=1 \
console=ttysclp0 \
coreos.inst.install_dev=/dev/sda \
coreos.live.rootfs_url=http://cl1.provide.example.com:8080/assets/rhcos-live-rootfs.s390x.img \
coreos.inst.ignition_url=http://cl1.provide.example.com:8080/ignition/worker.ign \
ip=172.18.78.2::172.18.78.1:255.255.255.0:::none nameserver=172.18.78.1 \
rd.znet=qeth,0.0.bdf0,0.0.bdf1,0.0.bdf2,layer2=1,portno=0 \
zfcp.allow_lun_scan=0 \
rd.zfcp=0.0.1987,0x50050763070bc5e3,0x4008400B00000000 \
rd.zfcp=0.0.19C7,0x50050763070bc5e3,0x4008400B00000000 \
rd.zfcp=0.0.1987,0x50050763071bc5e3,0x4008400B00000000 \
rd.zfcp=0.0.19C7,0x50050763071bc5e3,0x4008400B00000000
----
+

> Write all options in the parameter file as a single line and make sure you have no newline characters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Write all options in the parameter file as a single line and make sure you that there are no newline characters.
```

> . Transfer the initramfs, kernel, parameter files, and {op-system} images to z/VM, for example with FTP. For details about how to transfer the files with FTP and boot from the virtual reader, see link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/installation_guide/sect-installing-zvm-s390[Installing under Z/VM].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Transfer the initramfs, kernel, parameter files, and {op-system} images to z/VM, for example, by using FTP. For details about how to transfer the files with FTP and boot from the virtual reader, see link:https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/installation_guide/sect-installing-zvm-s390[Installing under Z/VM].
```

. Punch the files to the virtual reader of the z/VM guest virtual machine.
+
See link:https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/zvm/latest?topic=commands-punch[PUNCH] in IBM Documentation.
+
[TIP]
====
You can use the CP PUNCH command or, if you use Linux, the **vmur** command to transfer files between two z/VM guest virtual machines.
====
+
. Log in to CMS on the bootstrap machine.

> . IPL the bootstrap machine from the reader:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. IPL the bootstrap machine from the reader by using the following command:
```
